---
layout: default
title: Home
filename: index
---

**AqQua seeks to create the first foundational pelagic imaging model by consolidating billions of images from diverse aquatic environments around the globe. These images capture a vast range of species—from tiny plankton to larger marine organisms—and hold key insights into biodiversity and ecosystem health. By developing an AI model capable of classifying species, extracting biological traits, and estimating organic carbon content, AqQua will provide critical data necessary for understanding the biological carbon pump — a natural process that sequesters vast amounts of carbon from the atmosphere, significantly affecting global climate.**

Climate and human well-being depend to a large extent on aquatic life. In particular, organic matter formed by plankton sustainably sequesters vast amounts of carbon from the atmosphere. Climate change alters fish-planktonic food webs, impacting the ocean’s biological carbon pump, as well as marine and freshwater food resources. While the critical role of aquatic life for climate regulation and human nutrition mandates precise mapping and monitoring, the abundance of most species is still unknown and unmonitored to date, and likewise current estimates of global marine carbon export exhibit vast uncertainties on the same order of magnitude as anthropogenic CO2 emissions. <br>
To this end, distributed pelagic imaging techniques enable the sustained observation of aquatic life and its debris, comprehensively covering the earth’s water bodies down to the bottom of the deep sea. Each day, millions of images of plankton and associated environmental data are acquired by researchers around the globe using a variety of devices. Each individual data point provides information about biodiversity, functioning of aquatic foodwebs and ecosystem status of the related water body as well as its role in carbon sequestration. The Aquatic Life Foundation Project (AqQua) combines billions of images acquired with a variety of devices across the globe and leverage large-scale HPC to train the first foundational pelagic imaging model. The model will be fine-tuned for species classification, trait extraction and particulate organic carbon estimation, and distilled and deployed to the global community as a resource-efficient, easily usable tool. The model will be leveraged to establish global maps of species biodiversity, ecosystem status, and carbon flux at unprecedented accuracy and granularity, thereby generating a fundamental understanding of marine and freshwater life in times of global change that will serve to aid decision making, in particular with respect to emerging ocean-bound carbon dioxide removal technologies. <br>

AqQua is a Pilot Project in the [Helmholtz Foundation Model Initiative](https://hfmi.helmholtz.de)
